As detailed by its working group,
OpenID Connect allows you to use an existing account to sign into
multiple websites without needing to create new passwords.
It provides an identity layer on top of OAuth2,
which allows computing clients to verify the identity of an end user based on
the authentication performed by the authorization server,
as well as to obtain basic profile information about
the end user in a REST‑like manner.
Google's implementation actually complies with the
OpenID Connect's specification, so let's add sign‑in with Google to our demo app,
and Spring Security with Spring Boot makes this super easy; however,
first,
you need to register with Google Developer and then register your
application to use OpenID Connect Identity.
Google will provide you with the application's client ID and secret.
Now, add the following default authorized redirect URI.
Default for Spring is your domain followed by login/oauth2/code,
and then the client registration name, in this case,
Google.
That's the hard part.
Now, just like for Facebook,
Spring Boot has conveniently looked up all the
endpoints and configuration for you, apart from the client ID and secret,
of course, but that would be too easy.
So let's add these to our configuration.
Now, if we restart our app,
Spring now gives the user an option between Facebook and Google,
easy‑peasy,
and Spring Security and Spring Boot are handling all
the complexities for us; however,
let's take a peek under the covers to see how OpenID Connect works.
As mentioned, OpenID Connect extends the OAuth2 spec.
It still uses the authorization code flow,
so there's an authorization redirect request to the auth server,
very similar to Facebook's implementation,
but with the addition of the OpenID Connect scope.
Indicate to the auth server that this client wants OpenID Connect.
Additionally, there is now a nonce parameter to mitigate any replay attacks.
Now, if we authenticate with Google, you can see everything else is very similar,
the auth server returns back an auth code.
Where OpenID Connect provides value is the standardization of every field,
such as the endpoints, like the discovery document endpoint.
All OpenID Connect providers must use the same path.
So if you know your provider's domain,
your application can quickly source this document as it
will be the authorization server's domain followed by
.well‑known/openid‑configuration.
And in this document, if we open it,
is everything the client needs to bootstrap itself and
use the provider for authentication, like the token endpoint and much more.
If we didn't have the preconfigured endpoints
already done for us by Spring Boot,
we could have simply added this issuer URI in our
configuration for the provider Google.
In our config,
Spring Security would know to look up the discovery document by
putting a .well‑known/openid‑configuraiton path and simply
automatically bootstrap itself with the endpoints.
Now, in addition to an access token,
OpenID Connect will return a new type of token known as an identity token.
It's important as this token is meant for the client
to be used for authentication, unlike the access token,
which is intended to be used against the resource server to
authorize access to the protected resource.
The ID token follows a strict standard,
so the client dev team don't have to worry about changes to the token format,
which could break their authentication logic,
and there is no need to share this with third parties as
that's the role of the access token.
Now, I have created an endpoint in our controller to see this token.
Obviously, you wouldn't have something like this in production.
Now, this token follows the JSON web token specification,
so making it super easy to decode.
If I copy and paste this into JWT.IO, you can see,
it's a Base64 encoded string with three parts separated by a period.
Here, to the right, the parts are decoded.
The first is the header.
Next is the body with all the claims about the user with a
combination of mandatory and optional claims about the user
and the authentication event.
Some of the key mandatory claims are issuer,
which is who created this token, and in this case,
it's Google, the audience, who the token was minted for,
in this case, it's our application's client ID,
hence we can verify it was for an authentication event for our
application and not someone else's application,
the subject will contain the unique identifier for the user,
so we're confident that is unique and it won't change,
and, of course, the expiry of the token.
Additionally, we have optional claims from the scopes we requested.
Now, you can check out the OpenID spec for more details on these,
but the great thing is that as a developer,
if you're integrating with an OpenID Connect provider,
you know that if you request a scope,
the claims returned will follow the naming convention and even
format and date format defined in the spec,
so you don't have to develop custom parsing logic for each provider.
But since we're using Spring Security, this is all done for us anyways.
Now,
the third part of the JWT token is the signature as the whole token is digitally
signed so that you can verify the integrity of it offline,
and conveniently, in the Discovery document,
you have a link to the public keys to do this so your application can
bootstrap that and verify the token's integrity offline.
There is still more to OpenID Connect.
There are many different endpoints like session management for handling
logging out and many others that we'll cover later. However, next, let's wrap up this module.